# Artist's Statement

Project 2: Something is Wrong on the Internet

# World of Youtube

### Description/Intention

World of Youtube was a rather “straightforward” and concrete software exploration of one of the subthemes of James Bridle’s essay, There’s Something Wrong on the Internet. The concept of money and its alleged effects on motivational aspects behind artistic creation in particular was put down in the only real interaction in the software (which you could not really yet consider as a game, probably) that is speech recognition. As with any dialogue that treats with agents in a software through logical decision trees, this is not a real interaction per say but an interface for which we may enable a priori defined lines of speech commands leading into concrete in-software events.

The representation of World of Youtube was deliberately chosen to be that pertaining to a “childhood game fantasy” -- namely a mimic of early Final Fantasy games in the 8-bit to 16-bit generations. This was done to capture the aesthetical “innocence” and the iconical, contextual argued for a postmodernist (Our Aesthetic Categories: Zany, Cute, Interesting, Sianne Ngai, 2012) "cute" aesthetic playground associated or subverted along with the “fear for our kids nowadays” which James Bridle’ essay mainly touched upon. My intention was to put speech recognition--which we may attribute to children's eager and gleeful shouting, magical thinking, and lack of theory of mind for guessing the state of an interaction's social participants (ha, ha, finite state machines bad joke)--and responsive voice at the centre of the game’s interactive feature requirement, to make it sound (literally) that your own verbal “spells” may crucially have an impact on people’s decisions. This aspect was captured mainly in the game’s “fantasy” or concept that you are a lone wizard in search of spellbooks--and in search of morality thus--in the game (not yet implemented, however) that will allow you to “command” others. 

In this short prototype, the only “others” is the clone of yourself in the underground Youtube Creator Studio that is found hidden south east of the world. That clone, is meant to nudge the player into reflecting about the similarity present between “creator/producer” and “grunt who does the job” in areas where, let’s be frank, money is involved. (Full disclaimer: It was also because I ran out of resources quite literally in terms of pixel art assets and time). But nevertheless, we may speak of a big corporation like Google (owning Youtube since 2006, or earlier if you see the pattern) board directions and budget decisions for which the lowly media maker working has no tangible “clause of competition” in terms of interests, because they find themselves swaddled in a pool of content for which a certain amount of profitability and, as touched in James’ essay, marketability and not “essence” is the goal for these content producers. 

The hierarchical, patriarchal aggressiveness of having to best “hot trending” content to survive becoming obsolete and confined to the “youtube vaporware” that failed to deliver is enough incentive for mass generations of disturbing videos that have nothing to do with their content, but rather the circumstances that surround their credo. We may curiously wonder if the violence and graphicness depicted through algorithms in some way reflect the human failure to contain disparate areas of human behaviour for which profit is the main interest. And perhaps seeking profit leads to self-abuse which leads to self-alienation in the end. 

For the very fact that we are so shocked, distraught and disturbed by the up-and-coming of images like Peppa Pig Goes to the Dentist, hints to the possibility that we are already alienated from a state of mutual cognizance or “recognition” with ourselves, the image of a loving God, and with what we allow to be produced at our guise, like the impersonal spells of a wizard. Spells that represent also our desire to play God, or to "bite the forbidden fruit", while we remain estranged and unaware of our reach in the world, a world teeming with beauty and goodness as well placed by someone else than us, the player. Does this broken image communicate to us a need to be skeptical of reality and contenance? I don't know. But this “profitable innocence”, like that of an irresponsible wizard adventurer in World of Youtube, is as much habituation than it is condemnation, if the tendency is to displace or project to others our self-alienation rather than see the possibilities that continue to involve our tacit or implicit consent.

### Features
- Explore a top-down world without too much commitment
- Use speech recognition to cast spells <- kind of unreliable
- Generate money by asking for it <- no use yet
- It's basically a fantasy without the hype
- Generate Youtube videos based on the Youtube Keener's alignment (which depends on their bank account)
